# [GSoC 2022] Ham: Status Update

Hello everyone. This is a brief update on the Ham project - a drop in replacement for the Jam build system. For those more curious about the technical details, there will be a larger blog post on Ham's action modifier implementation coming soon.

# What's been done so far?

The majority of the work has been in implementing Jam language features. Today, Ham hit a major milestone by supporting all of Jam's action modifiers (`updated`, `together`, `quietly`, `piecemeal`, `ignore`, and `existing`). Ham specifies the semantics of these modifiers in much greater detail than Jam, and has improved performance (especially with `piecemeal`). This means you should see better performance on commands like `jam clean`. Centralized documentation of Ham's language semantics is ongoing, but you can see the discussions and remaining tasks on the language issue tracker[1].

=> https://github.com/dominicm00/ham/issues/48 1: language issue tracker

There's also been plenty of documentation improvements, bug fixes, miscellaneous features, and (in-progress) refactoring to make better use of the C++ standard library.

Ham is currently able to build itself, meaning it can parse the built-in rules and build a shared library/binary correctly.

# What's left to do?

The current goal is to do a successful build of Haiku, which you can track on the GitHub milestone[1]. This should weed out most remaining major bugs.

=> https://github.com/dominicm00/ham/milestone/9 1: GitHub milestone

After that, there's plenty of work to do, including: - More documentation (#64[1], #63[2], #16[3] - Better platform compatibility, including Windows support (#27[4] - Better debugging output (debug issues[5] - Support for outputting a clangd compilation database - Syntax highlighting for major editors - Refactoring to use standard parsing/testing libraries

=> https://github.com/dominicm00/ham/issues/64 1: #64
=> https://github.com/dominicm00/ham/issues/63 2: #63
=> https://github.com/dominicm00/ham/pull/16) 3: #16
=> https://github.com/dominicm00/ham/pull/16) 4: #27
=> https://github.com/dominicm00/ham/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aopen+label%3Ais%3Adebug) 5: debug issues

You can always track what's being worked on on the Ham project board[1].

=> https://github.com/users/dominicm00/projects/1/views/1 1: Ham project board

