# [GSoC 2018] TrackGit - Git Addon for Tracker

Hie, I'm Hrishikesh Hiraskar (IRC/Trac/Github: hrily) from India.  I will be working on __TrackGit__, a git addon for Git version control for Tracker under GSoC 2018.

I'm really excited to be a part of Haiku community and for doing this project.  I'm currently doing my B.Tech. in Computer Engineering at National Institute of Technology Karnataka, Surathkal. You can find more information about me on my website[1] or my blog[2].

=> https://hrily.github.io/ 1: website
=> https://hrily.github.io/blog/ 2: blog

## About TrackGit

The proposed project focuses on implementing an Addon for Tracker to support the Git version control system. The following are the requirements from the Addon:

+ Provide user friendly graphical interface:   + To create or clone git repositories.

  + To add files to git.

  + To commit the changes.

  + To create or merge branches.

  + To resolve conflicts.

  + To view differences in versions.

+ Provide user with necessary feedback at various events of success and errors.

+ Provide visual cues for status of various files in repository.

+ Provide extensibility for adding new functionalities.

## Background

There is a similar add on for Tracker which is based on _Subversion_. It is MoleSVN[1]. Some of the UI inspiration for this project is taken from MoleSVN.

=> https://github.com/HaikuArchives/MoleSvn 1: MoleSVN

## Dynamic Tracker Menu

To improve Tracker Addon's functionality, I'll also be working on making a dynamic menu, where addon can insert Menu Items to the Root Menu according to the selected files. I have got a experimental prototype for this working.

## The Project Proposal

For more information on the project, you can check out my GSoC proposal for Trackgit[1].

=> https://drive.google.com/file/d/1nailoOCGmpRVo3sZ8mdXGmpuWxXdgf1T/view?usp=sharing 1: GSoC proposal for Trackgit

I hope you like my project proposal. Any suggestions are welcome. You can write them here or you can always contact me (contact details on my website).

