# [GSoC 2022] Improving the Calendar Application

# Introduction

Hello! I'm Harshit Sharma (GitHub : harshit-sharma-gits) a 2nd year BTech Undergrad from Harcourt Butler Technical University (HBTU), Kanpur. I will be working on improving the **Calendar Application** which was developed under GSoC 2017 by Akshay Agarwal.

My mentors for this project are Niels Sascha Reedijk[1] and Humdinger[2].

=> https://discuss.haiku-os.org/u/nielx 1: Niels Sascha Reedijk
=> https://discuss.haiku-os.org/u/humdinger 2: Humdinger

Here is the link to my Proposal[1] I am really excited for this project!

=> https://docs.google.com/document/d/1uCe2aOFJKeP9LJ9ciEifAA8UEvEXHgqZHxY0rKecuS0/edit?usp=sharing 1: Proposal

# Introduction to the project

A Calendar application is a must have application for any operating system and is beneficial for end users as well as developers. Having a feature-rich Calendar might not sound like a big deal, but it can drastically impact your performance at work and personal life.

I will be working on below mentioned features :   - Reminders Utility - Calendar Profiles - Search Utility - CalDav Integration

I have discussed the possibilities of this project with the community, and got some really useful insights on this[1] thread.

=> https://discuss.haiku-os.org/t/gsoc-22-project-improving-the-calendar-application/12139 1: this

I would be finalizing the discussion in the upcoming weeks, so suggestion from you all would be highly valuable!

I would keep the blog updated regarding the progress of the project.

