# [GSoC 2017] 3D Hardware Acceleration - Weekly Report 3

### Greetings

Almost 2 weeks since the last Weekly Report, so here goes what I have been up to in the last two weeks.

### Adding code

I am slowly adding new code as you might see here[1]. Each commit represents a new file and its dependencies compiling successfully in my machine(gcc5). In asm/atomic.h[2] I have commented out some of the functions[3] which I believe is not required for DRM. If I find some use of those functions then I will have to revisit this file and make the necessary changes. Also, I have used some compiler (gcc5) functions[4] in asm/atomic[5] which will later have to be changed appropriately for use with gcc2 if that is desired.

=> https://github.com/vivek-roy/haiku/commits/drm 1: here
=> https://github.com/vivek-roy/haiku/blob/9026ac8d45499d16e78b16058ba580467e9fbe3d/headers/compatibility/linuxkpi/asm/atomic.h 2: asm/atomic.h
=> https://github.com/vivek-roy/haiku/blob/9026ac8d45499d16e78b16058ba580467e9fbe3d/headers/compatibility/linuxkpi/asm/atomic.h#L113 3: functions
=> https://github.com/vivek-roy/haiku/blob/9026ac8d45499d16e78b16058ba580467e9fbe3d/headers/compatibility/linuxkpi/asm/atomic.h#L60 4: functions
=> https://github.com/vivek-roy/haiku/blob/9026ac8d45499d16e78b16058ba580467e9fbe3d/headers/compatibility/linuxkpi/asm/atomic.h 5: asm/atomic

I am adding these headers (rather slowly), and trying to keep the #includes as tidy as possible. Once I have these important headers in place, things will be faster with every new addition. Whatever questions I have, I keep asking in the GSoC mailing list (haiku-gsoc@freelists.org). I would love some feedback and/or recommended changes, either in the GSoC mailing list or comments to my commits on GitHub[1]. As of now I am trying to implement linux/mutex.h using lock.h[2].

=> https://github.com/vivek-roy/haiku/commits/drm 1: commits on GitHub
=> http://cgit.haiku-os.org/haiku/tree/headers/private/kernel/lock.h 2: lock.h

Thank you for reading.

