# GSoC 2021 Progress Update 1: Coding style checker bot for Gerrit

Hey everyone! I am Hrithik (ritz), You can find about my project in my introductory blog[1]. Here's what I have done so far.

=> https://discuss.haiku-os.org/t/gsoc-2021-coding-style-checker-bot-for-gerrit-haiku-project/10772 1: introductory blog

I started by reading Concourse CI documentation in order to get myself familiarise with ci pipeline and various schema involved in it. I also looked at other resources provided by my mentors i.e. Suhel Mehta @suhel_mehta and Alexander von Gluck @kallisti5 . Below are some links if anyone wants to check out.

- CI Documentation[1]
=> https://concourse-ci.org/docs.html 1: CI Documentation

- CI Examples[1]
- Concourse tutorial by Stark & Wayne[2] 
- Blog on task inputs and outputs[3]

=> https://concourse-ci.org/examples.html 1: CI Examples
=> https://concoursetutorial.com/ 2: Concourse tutorial by Stark & Wayne
=> https://blog.concourse-ci.org/introduction-to-task-inputs-and-outputs/ 3: Blog on task inputs and outputs

After setting up Concourse CI and Gerrit instance locally, I started off by trying to implement a basic pipeline integrating both. So I created a test repo in gerrit and wrote a pipeline.yaml file for concourse having a simple job and tried to trigger it manually. Unfortunately I struggled to get the concourse clone the local gerrit repo and faced with errors. So I asked the same to concourse discord help channel and got to know that since concourse runs the job in a container it has a different meaning of `localhost` in the url. So I changed the gerrit url in the gerrit.config file by replacing `localhost` with my `machine-name` and it started working!

My next target was to trigger the job automatically whenever a commit happens, so I added `trigger:true` property in the get step.

I ran the whole thing only to later realise that it gets triggered everytime a merge happens in the master branch but not when a patchset towards master is created. I then looked more into how Gerrit works and got to know that commits get stored in `refs/changes/` namespace which is created by Gerrit itself so the master never changes unless the commit gets merged hence it doesn't get triggered whenever a patchset is created. Below is my pipeline.yml

```
resources:
- name: test
  type: git
  icon: github
  source:
    uri: "http://@hrithik:8090/test"
    branch: master
    
jobs:
- name: job
  public: true
  plan:
    - get: test
      trigger: true
    - get: commit
      trigger: true
    - task: hello
      config:
        inputs:
        - name: test
        platform: linux
        image_resource:
          type: registry-image
          source:
            repository: busybox
        run:
          path: cat
          args: ["./test/help.txt"]
    - task: bye
      config:
        platform: linux
        image_resource:
          type: registry-image
          source:
            repository: busybox
        run:
          path: echo
          args: ["bye"]
```

I found this docker image on docker hub named [gerrit-resource](https://hub.docker.com/r/matbain/gerrit-resource ) so I gave it a try and added it as my resource but it didn't work either.

```
resource_types:
- name: gerrit
  image:
    type: docker-image
    source:
      repository: malston/gerrit-resource
```

```
resources:
- name: test
  type: git
  icon: github
  source:
    uri: "http://@hrithik:8090/test"
    branch: master
```

```
resources:
- name: commit
  type: gerrit
  source:
    uri: "http://@hrithik:8090/test"
    branch: master
```

```
jobs:
- name: job
  public: true
  plan:
    - get: test
      trigger: true
    - get: commit
      trigger: true
    - task: hello
      config:
        inputs:
        - name: test
        - name: commit
        platform: linux
        image_resource:
          type: registry-image
          source:
            repository: busybox
        run:
          path: cat
          args: ["./test/help.txt"]
    - task: bye
      config:
        platform: linux
        image_resource:
          type: registry-image
          source:
            repository: busybox
        run:
          path: echo
          args: ["bye"]
```

Right now I am looking into this resource[1] It is starting to look like I might have to create a custom resource type myself if this doesn't work out either.

=> https://github.com/google/concourse-resources/tree/master/gerrit 1: this resource

Suggestions and ideas are always welcome :) 
